.TH NETFIREWALL-TUI 1 "2026" "NetFirewall" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
netfirewall-tui \- console UI for the NetFirewall daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sudo netfirewall-tui
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B netfirewall-tui
is a Spectre.Console-based text UI that talks to the local
.B netfirewall-daemon
over its Unix socket
.RB ( /run/netfirewall/control.sock ).
It exposes the same operations the Web UI does, intended for two scenarios:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
Configuring the first network interface on a freshly-installed host (no Web reachable yet).
.IP \(bu 2
Recovering from a locked-out admin or lost TOTP device, when the Web login flow is blocked.
.RE
.SH AUTHENTICATION
The daemon enforces a peer-credential gate
.RB ( SO_PEERCRED
on Linux): only UIDs in
.B Daemon__AcceptedPeerUids
may connect.
.B install.sh
populates this with the
.B netfirewall-web
UID and root, so
.B sudo netfirewall-tui
reaches the socket from a console session.

Once connected, the TUI presents two paths:
.TP
.B Login
Single-step flow: username + password + TOTP/recovery code in one screen.
.B POST /v1/auth/login
on the daemon validates and issues a session.
TUI sessions are born elevated \(em destructive operations don't re-prompt
TOTP because the operator is at a physical console and just proved TOTP at login.
.TP
.B Recovery
Reachable WITHOUT login via
.BR DaemonRequireRootPeerAttribute :
the daemon checks the connecting peer is root and skips the session check.
Used when the operator can't log in at all (forgot password, lost TOTP device).
Two actions: reset password, disable TOTP. Both also clear lockout state so
the user can immediately re-authenticate.
.SH MENU
.TP
.B Network interfaces
List configured interfaces from
.BR fw_interfaces .
Edit IP / mask / gateway / MAC / MTU.
Add new entries from physically-detected NICs (kernel-visible via
.BR DiscoverInterfacesAsync ).
Apply via
.B POST /v1/network/{id}/apply
which writes
.IR /etc/netplan/*.yaml ,
.IR /etc/network/interfaces.d/*.cfg ,
or a NetworkManager
.BR *.nmconnection ,
depending on the host's distro / network manager.
.TP
.B Recovery \(em reset admin / TOTP
Lists all users (with locked / inactive / no-totp markers) so the operator
picks the right account at a glance.
.TP
.B Daemon status
Read-only ping (no auth required) \(em
.B GET /health
plus a fetch of
.BR "nft list ruleset" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /opt/netfirewall/tui/netfirewall-tui.dll
The published binary. Invoked via the wrapper at
.IR /opt/netfirewall/tui/netfirewall-tui ,
which is symlinked to
.IR /usr/local/bin/netfirewall-tui .
.TP
.I /opt/netfirewall/tui/appsettings.json
Resolves the daemon socket path. Mode 0644 \(em readable by anyone running
the TUI.
.TP
.I /run/netfirewall/control.sock
The daemon's Unix socket. Mode 0660, root:netfirewall. The TUI reaches it
either as root (sudo) or as a member of the
.B netfirewall
group.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B Daemon__SocketPath
Override the daemon socket path for ad-hoc invocations \(em useful when
testing against a non-default daemon instance.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on a clean exit (Quit choice). Non-zero if the TUI cannot start (typically
a missing or unreadable
.IR appsettings.json ).
Operational errors during a session (daemon offline, login denied, apply
failed) are reported in-screen and do NOT terminate the program.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR netfirewall-daemon (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR netplan (5)
